# Decentralized Digital Identity
### The advent of Self-Sovereign Identity with Blockchain

**Alex Preukschat and Drummond Reed**

**Background**

Alex Preukschat and Drummond Reed are preparing a book about
decentralized digital identity in which many people from the global
identity and blockchain communities are participating. It is expected
that this book will become a reference piece about decentralized digital
identity and the self-sovereign identity ecosystem around the world. It
will be published in the autumn of 2019.

**Structure of the book**

The objective of the book is to be as evergreen as possible in
highlighting the importance of self-sovereign identity for the world,
sharing use cases in plenty of different industries, exploring the
concept of decentralization, explaining the basic architecture and
technology principles for SSI and the legal frameworks that will support
(and be enabled by) SSI. One-third of any revenue generated by the book
will be donated to RWOT, one third to IIW and one third to
SSIMeetup.org. The authors will not receive any monetary compensation
for the book.

<span id="_gjdgxs" class="anchor"></span>

**Anthology Format**

The book is designed to be an anthology composed of chapters contributed
by many different authors in the space. The first three chapters, by
Alex, Drummond, and Christopher Allen, will set the stage and provide
the big picture of SSI. Then there will be major sections as shown in
the TOC below.

**About Alex Preukschat**

Alex is a best selling author for "Blockchain: the industrial revolution
of the internet". Published May 2017 with 7 editions/8000 prints in 15
months. TOP 10 Amazon.es best seller for two weeks and TOP 1 best seller
for the business and technology section for one month. Most popular and
sold Spanish speaking Blockchain book. 4 editions in 4 months and 5000
printed copies. Published also in Colombia, Peru, Ecuador, and
Argentina. Creator and Autor of the first Bitcoin graphic novel of the
world: "Bitcoin: The hunt for Satoshi Nakamoto". Published in English,
Russian, Korean, Brazilian Portuguese and Spanish in 2014 that became a
global best seller in the global Bitcoin community. Coordinating author
of the Spanish translation of the “The book of Satosi” available here
libroblockchain.com/satoshi and co-creator of Blockchain España (
Blockchain Espana.org: one of the main Spanish Blockchain communities)
and Alianza Blockchain Iberoamérica (AlianzaBlockchain.org: an alliance
of Blockchain communities from Argentina, Chile, Colombia, Panama,
Mexico, and Spain).

Creator of SSIMeetup.org, a global Self-Sovereign Identity (SSI)
community, to popularize interest around the principles of Decentralized
Digital Identity.

**About Drummond Reed**

Drummond has spent over two decades in Internet identity, security,
privacy, and trust frameworks. He joined Evernym as Chief Trust Officer
after Evernym’s acquisition of Respect Network, where he was CEO,
co-founder, and co-author of the Respect Trust Framework, which was
honored with the Privacy Award at the 2011 European Identity Conference.
Drummond is a Trustee and Secretary of the Sovrin Foundation, where he
serves as chair of the Sovrin Trust Framework Working Group. He has
served as co-chair of the OASIS XDI Technical Committee since 2004, the
semantic data interchange protocol that implements Privacy by Design.
Prior to starting Respect Network, Drummond was Executive Director of
two industry foundations: the Information Card Foundation and the Open
Identity Exchange. He has also served as a founding board member of the
OpenID Foundation, ISTPA, XDI.org, and Identity Commons. In 2002 he was
a recipient of the Digital Identity Pioneer Award from Digital ID World,
and in 2013 he was honored as an OASIS Distinguished Contributor.

**Draft Table of Contents**

> Decentralized Digital Identity: The Advent of Self-Sovereign Identity
> with Blockchain

**Part A Decentralized Digital Identity: What Is It?**

1 Decentralized digital identity: principles & fundamentals

2 The path to Self-Sovereign Identity (SSI)

3 Concepts of Decentralized Digital Identity

**Part B How the Identity Revolution will Change your Business**

4 Digital Banking just got faster and more trustworthy with
Decentralized Identity

5 Decentralized financial products decrease wait times when powered by
Decentralized Identity

6 Insurance firms reinvent themselves with Decentralized Digital
Identity

7 Telecommunications providers find profound ways to fill the missing
gap of the Internet

8 The energy sector gets a new relationship model

9 Decentralized Digital Identity in Healthcare: The foundations of a new
era of trusted relationships between individuals, organizations and
clinical things

10 The next Media revolution is here thanks to Decentralized Digital
Identity

11 NGOs and financial inclusion powered by Decentralized Identity

12 Governments get on board to enhance the public good with
Decentralized Digital Identity

13 Canada: The meaning of trust for Identity

14 Law enforcement and legal professionals streamline crime fighting
once and for all

15 Decentralized Digital Identity squashes multiple squabbles in family
court

16 Educational facilities turn to Decentralized Digital Identity to keep
students and staff safer

17 Animal care, adoption, and accountability just became crystal clear

18 The Coworking and office space industry with decentralized identity

19 The Recruitment industry with decentralized identity

**Part C Cross-Industry Use Cases of Blockchain**

18 Open democracy and electronic voting

19 Smart cities with Decentralized Identity

20 Music, images and a fairer concept of intellectual property

21 Decentralized identity, Decentralized File Systems, and the
Decentralized Web

22 The opportunity of e-commerce with Identity

23 Smart contracts and Decentralized Digital Identity

24 The Self-Sovereign Expansion of the Digital “I” and “We”

25 Supply-chain management powered by Decentralized Digital Identity in
Pharma

**Part D Decentralization as a model for life**

26 Hacktivism, cypherpunks and the birth of Decentralized Digital
Identity

28 Decentralization for a peaceful society

29 Decentralization as a model for life

30 The three dimensions of Decentralized Identity

31 Centralization vs decentralization believers

**Part E Blockchain & Decentralized Identity Technology**

32 Basic Cryptography principles for Decentralized Digital Identity

33 Free software, open source in the Decentralized Digital Identity
world

34 Decentralized Digital Identity Architectures

35 Verifiable Credentials

36 DIDs – the basic ingredients

37 Decentralized Identity Graphs

38 Identity wallets are not the same as crypto wallets

39 Making Smart Contracts smart with Decentralized Digital Identity

40 Public Identities in the Ethereum ecosystem

**Part F Decentralized Identity and the Law**

41 Legal questions from Decentralized Digital Identity to Governance
Frameworks

**Part G Identity, Investment and Money**

42 Decentralized Digital Identity protocol business models

43 Identity is money

**Part H Closing**

44 A vision of the future based on Decentralized Digital Identity

45 Evolution of the Decentralized Digital Identity Community
